W-22800606-add-components-dm (#585)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-scope-visibility.adoc

= Scope Visibility in DataWeave

> :page-aliases: dataweave::dataweave-scope-visibility.adoc

Reviewer: Does this work having a page alias to itself?

DataWeave 2.12.0 introduces scope visibility so you can control which directives in a DataWeave file are accessible from other files. Visibility rules apply to module-level declarations: `fun`, `var`, `type`, `ns`, and `annotation`.

Scope visibility is primarily for DataWeave library authors. If you write Mule transformation mappings (the `%dw 2.0` script in a Transform Message component), you can ignore this feature because a mapping is a single, self-contained file that doesn't export directives to other files. Visibility becomes relevant when you publish a `.jar` that other DataWeave code imports.

== Visibility Levels

DataWeave 2.12.0 supports three visibility levels:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Level    | Keyword    | Accessible from
| Public   | _(none)_   | Anywhere. Default and only behavior in versions before 2.12.0.
| Private  | `private`  | The same file only.
| Internal | `internal` | Any file in the same xref:#components[component]. Can be widened with `@VisibleTo`.
|===

[NOTE]
====

> Visibility checks run only at *compile time*. Once a script is compiled, no runtime visibility check is performed. This keeps execution overhead at zero and ensures pre-compiled (`.bdwl`) modules behave the same as source modules.

Author: ```suggestion
Visibility checks run only at compile time. Once a script is compiled, no runtime visibility check is performed. This keeps execution overhead at zero and ensures pre-compiled (`.bdwl`) modules behave the same as source modules.
```

====

== Syntax

> Place the visibility keyword before the directive keyword (`fun`, `var`, `type`, `ns`, `annotation`).

Author: ```suggestion
Place the visibility keyword before the directive keyword (`fun`, `var`, `type`, `ns`, and `annotation`).
```

private fun normalize(name: String) = upper(name)

// Internal — accessible from any file in the same component
internal var defaultGreeting = "Hello"

// Type and namespace declarations also support visibility
private type UserName = String
internal ns http https://schemas.example.org/http
----

The `@VisibleTo` annotation widens an `internal` directive to a fixed list of additional components:

[source,dataweave]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from dw::Core

@VisibleTo(components = ["analytics", "reporting"])
internal fun computeStats(records: Array) = sizeOf(records)
----

`@VisibleTo` is only valid on `internal` directives. Applying it to a `private` directive or to a directive without a visibility keyword raises a compile-time error: `The @VisibleTo annotation can only be applied to 'internal' directives`.

[[components]]
== What Is a Component?

DataWeave doesn't provide a `module` or `package` keyword to group files. Until 2.12.0, every `.dwl` file lived in one global namespace. To make `internal` meaningful, the language now uses the component concept, which is a named set of DataWeave resources (modules) that are compiled and packaged together.

> A component is described by a component descriptor, a `.dwl` resource located at `META-INF/dw-components.dwl` inside a `.jar`. The descriptor is an array of components, and each component lists the resources it owns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A component is described by a component descriptor, a `.dwl` resource located at `META-INF/dw-components.dwl` inside a `.jar` file. The descriptor is an array of components, and each component lists the resources it owns:
```

[source,dataweave]
----
%dw 2.0
---
[
    {
        name: "wlang",
        resources: {
            "dw::Core": {},
            "dw::Crypto": {},
            "dw::core::Arrays": {},
            "dw::core::Strings": {}
            // ...
        }
    }
]
----

> When the compiler resolves a reference to a symbol declared in another module, it looks up which component owns the declaring module and which component owns the caller module by consulting the descriptors on the classpath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the compiler resolves a reference to a symbol declared in another module, it consults the descriptors on the classpath to determine the components that own the declaring module and the caller module.
```

=== Generating the Descriptor

You don't write the descriptor manually. The xref:dataweave::dataweave-maven-plugin.adoc[Maven plugin for DataWeave] generates it automatically:

* For a production build (`data-weave:package`), the plugin scans `src/main/dw`, derives the resource names of every `.dwl` file, and writes `target/generated-dataweave-metadata/dw-components.dwl`. The file is added to the produced JAR at `META-INF/dw-components.dwl`.

> * For a test build (`data-weave:test`), the plugin scans both `src/main/dw` and `src/test/dw`, so test files belong to the same component as the production sources they exercise. This lets tests call `internal` directives without further configuration.

Reviewer: avoid "lets" per SG.

The component name defaults to the Maven `artifactId` of the project.

=== Component Resolution Algorithm

Given a reference from caller `A` to symbol `s` declared in module `B`:

. The compiler looks up `componentOf(B)` from the descriptors on the classpath.

> . If `s` is `private`, access is allowed only when `A == B`.

Reviewer: Should this be a sub-bullet list, since these three items aren't sequential?

```suggestion
+
** If `s` is `private`, access is allowed only when `A == B`.
```

. If `s` is `internal`, access is allowed when `componentOf(A) == componentOf(B)`, or when `componentOf(A)` appears in the `@VisibleTo` list on `s`.
. If `s` is `public`, access is always allowed.

> If a module declares `internal` directives and no descriptor on the classpath claims it, the compiler emits the `Module 'X' declares 'internal' members but has no component descriptor` error. In that case, package the module with the Maven plugin for DataWeave or add a component descriptor that lists it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a module declares `internal` directives and no descriptor on the classpath claims it, the compiler emits the `Module 'X' declares `internal` members but has no component descriptor` error. In that case, package the module with the Maven plugin for DataWeave or add a component descriptor that lists it.
```

Reviewer: Global: Check the single quotes.

== Compile-Time Validation

The compiler reports four new errors:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Error kind | Triggered when
| `PrivateAccessViolation` | A reference targets a `private` directive declared in a different file.
| `InternalAccessViolation` | A reference targets an `internal` directive declared in a different component, when the caller's component is not in the directive's `@VisibleTo` list.

> | `VisibleToRequiresInternal` | `@VisibleTo` is applied to a directive that is not `internal`.

Author: ```suggestion
| `InternalAccessViolation` | A reference targets an `internal` directive declared in a different component, when the caller's component isn't in the directive's `@VisibleTo` list.
| `VisibleToRequiresInternal` | `@VisibleTo` is applied to a directive that isn't `internal`.
```

== Structural Types and Visibility Propagation

DataWeave uses a structural type system. Visibility on a type controls who can reference the type by name and doesn't propagate to functions or variables that use that type in their signature. A caller can invoke a function whose signature mentions a `private` type as long as the caller doesn't name that type.

[source,dataweave]
----
// In component A
private type Account = { id: String }

@VisibleTo(components = ["bat"])
internal fun createAccount(account: Account) = account

// In component B (bat)
import createAccount from componentA::Accounts

// OK — structural call, no explicit reference to `Account`
createAccount({ id: "abc" })

// Error — explicit reference to private type `Account`
createAccount({ id: "abc" }) as Account
----

The same rule applies to type annotations on variables (`var x: Account = ...`) and pattern matches that name a type.

== Examples

> 

Reviewer: We need content for each heading level (Agentforce chunking needs it)

=== File-Local Helper

> 

Reviewer: Add some context?

[source,dataweave]
----
// dw/core/Core.dwl

%dw 2.0

private fun isLegacyMode(): Boolean =
    evaluateCompatibilityFlag("com.mulesoft.dw.legacyMode")

fun sizeOf(value) =
    if (isLegacyMode()) legacyImpl(value) else newImpl(value)
----

`isLegacyMode` is reachable only inside `Core.dwl`.

=== Component-Internal Helper

> 

Reviewer: Context

[source,dataweave]
----
// dw/core/Internal.dwl   (component: wlang)
%dw 2.0
internal fun dropFrame(): Boolean = ...

// dw/core/Core.dwl   (component: wlang)
%dw 2.0
import dropFrame from dw::core::Internal
fun process() = if (dropFrame()) ... else ...   // OK — same component

// com/acme/App.dwl   (component: acme-app)
%dw 2.0
import dropFrame from dw::core::Internal         // Error: internal to `wlang`
----

=== Sharing Internals With a Specific Component

> 

Reviewer: (I'll stop marking these)

[source,dataweave]
----
// dw/native/Native.dwl   (component: wlang)
%dw 2.0

@VisibleTo(components = ["bat", "dataweave-io"])
internal fun nativeImpl() = ...

// bat/core/Runner.dwl   (component: bat)
import nativeImpl from dw::native::Native        // OK — bat is permitted

// com/paypal/Connector.dwl   (component: paypal-connector)
import nativeImpl from dw::native::Native        // Error — not permitted
----

== Migrating From `@Internal(permits=...)`

In versions before 2.12.0, the only way to constrain visibility was the experimental `@Internal(permits = [...])` annotation, which matched callers by `NameIdentifier` prefix. `@Internal` is still accepted in 2.12.0 but is deprecated in favor of the new keywords:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===

> | Old form | Replacement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Old Form | Replacement
```

Reviewer: Global: check table column heads - ensure Title Case

| `@Internal(permits = [])` | `private`
| `@Internal(permits = ["dw::"])` | `internal` (the consuming component must also be migrated to a 2.12.0 build so a descriptor exists)
| `@Internal(permits = ["bat::", "dw::"])` | `@VisibleTo(components = ["bat"])` `internal`
|===

Files that don't use any visibility keyword behave exactly as in earlier versions: every directive is public.

== Setting a Per-Component Language Level

When a host application embeds the DataWeave engine, it can pin a specific language level for each component using the new `componentLanguageLevels` parameter on `DWScriptingEngine.compileDWScript`:

[source,scala]
----
def compileDWScript(
    script: String,
    languageLevel: String,
    componentLanguageLevels: util.Map[String, String] = new util.HashMap()
): DWScript
----

This is used together with `@Since` on function overloads to dispatch to the correct overload when a library evolves, ensuring backward compatibility for existing scripts.

== See Also

> * xref:dataweave::dw-component.adoc[`dw::meta::Component` Module]

Reviewer: Hard-coded link text necessary?

|===

[NOTE]
====
Visibility checks run only at compile time. Once a script is compiled, no runtime visibility check is performed. This keeps execution overhead at zero and ensures pre-compiled (`.bdwl`) modules behave the same as source modules.
====

== Syntax

Place the visibility keyword before the directive keyword (`fun`, `var`, `type`, `ns`, and `annotation`).

[source,dataweave]
----
%dw 2.0

// Public (default) — accessible from anywhere
fun greet(name: String) = "Hello, $(name)!"

// Private — accessible only inside this file
private fun normalize(name: String) = upper(name)

// Internal — accessible from any file in the same component
internal var defaultGreeting = "Hello"

// Type and namespace declarations also support visibility
private type UserName = String
internal ns http https://schemas.example.org/http
----

The `@VisibleTo` annotation widens an `internal` directive to a fixed list of additional components:

[source,dataweave]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from dw::Core

@VisibleTo(components = ["analytics", "reporting"])
internal fun computeStats(records: Array) = sizeOf(records)
----

> `@VisibleTo` is only valid on `internal` directives. Applying it to a `private` directive or to a directive without a visibility keyword raises a compile-time error: `The @VisibleTo annotation can only be applied to 'internal' directives`.

Author: ```suggestion
`@VisibleTo` is only valid on `internal` directives. Applying it to a `private` directive or to a directive without a visibility keyword raises a compile-time error: `The @VisibleTo annotation can only be applied to `internal` directives`.
```

> `@VisibleTo` is only valid on `internal` directives. Applying it to a `private` directive or to a directive without a visibility keyword raises a compile-time error: `The @VisibleTo annotation can only be applied to `internal` directives`.

Author: ```suggestion
`@VisibleTo` is only valid on `internal` directives. Applying it to a `private` directive or to a directive without a visibility keyword raises a compile-time error: `The @VisibleTo annotation can only be applied to 'internal' directives`.
```

* For a production build (`data-weave:package`), the plugin scans `src/main/dw`, derives the resource names of every `.dwl` file, and writes `target/generated-dataweave-metadata/dw-components.dwl`. The file is added to the produced JAR at `META-INF/dw-components.dwl`.
* For a test build (`data-weave:test`), the plugin scans both `src/main/dw` and `src/test/dw`, so test files belong to the same component as the production sources they exercise. This lets tests call `internal` directives without further configuration.

The component name defaults to the Maven `artifactId` of the project.

=== Component Resolution Algorithm

Given a reference from caller `A` to symbol `s` declared in module `B`, the compiler looks up `componentOf(B)` from the descriptors on the classpath. Access is allowed based on the visibility of `s`:

* If `s` is `private`, access is allowed only when `A == B`.
* If `s` is `internal`, access is allowed when `componentOf(A) == componentOf(B)`, or when `componentOf(A)` appears in the `@VisibleTo` list on `s`.
* If `s` is `public`, access is always allowed.

> If a module declares `internal` directives and no descriptor on the classpath claims it, the compiler emits the `Module 'X' declares `internal` members but has no component descriptor` error. In that case, package the module with the Maven plugin for DataWeave or add a component descriptor that lists it.

Author: ```suggestion
If a module declares `internal` directives and no descriptor on the classpath claims it, the compiler emits the `Module 'X' declares 'internal' members but has no component descriptor` error. In that case, package the module with the Maven plugin for DataWeave or add a component descriptor that lists it.
```
